Collection of Exam Preparation Tasks for the Lecture “Network Security” 
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
1)	Explain the difference between safety and security. 
Safety： Detection and correction of disruptions that have an impact on the stability of operations
	 In software safety is put at risk by programming mistakes 
Security Detection and protection against (often specific)attacks
difference safety is focused on the programming mistakes that can be used by the attackers.  
	   security is focused on the method against the attack. 

2)	Explain the IT security aims confidentiality, integrity, authenticity, availability, non-repudiation, and privacy. Give examples of situations where each aim is at risk and provide measures to ensure that each aim is achieved. 

aim Confidentiality Prevention of unauthorized gaining of information
situation  Alice would like to give data to Bob, but it should not be made available to Carol. 
measure to the situation  communication is done via files 
Alice writes in a file
Bob is allowed to read this file
Bob writes data into another file 
this file is readable for Carol 
Carol gets the data   

Measures 
1.Data encryption 
2.Rules for allowed/not allowed information flows 
3.Who can access which information or get to know about it 
4. Information flow control: Classification of subjects and objects 
`In particular: confinement problem, i.e. hidden channels, side channels

Integrity 
Protection against unauthorized and unnoticed change of data
Situation 
Measures to ensure data integrity include
1. Rules for allowed/not allowed data changes
 Who (subject) can modify a certain object (asset) in which
way (rights) under which conditions?
2. Granting of access and control rights
 E.g. r (read), w (write), x (execute) in Unix file systems
3. Isolation: domains, sandboxes, virtual machines
4. Manipulation detection: check sums, digital watermarks

Authenticity
Proof of correctness and credibility of an
object’s or subject’s identity
Measures 
1.	Rules for the assignment of unique identifiers to subjects and objects 
2.	 Passwords, keys, biometry, smart cards, … 
3.	Not only identifiers, but also attributes that characterize a subject 
4.	Procedure to proof the correctness of an identity 
5.	Provisioning and check of certificates, credentials, tokens 
6.	Challenge/response protocols: Question/answer procedures

Availability 
Protection against undesired limitations of the use of functionality/services, etc
Short term measures: Rules for recording and surveillance 
Record which accesses on which objects happened when under which resource consumption 
Specification of thresholds(门槛), e.g. for overload 
Remark: Rules means an obligation to act on violations (not like grants or forbids) 
Longer term measures
Add more resources, redundant structure

Accountabiliy (Non-repudiation) 
Protection against claims (not) to have done certain actions
Measures: Specification of accountable actions 
1.Linking of action with subject who performs the action: (digital) signature 
2.Logging of actions and time stamps, log files on operations system level take note of security relevant actions 
3.Capture proofs of action (e.g. for forensic(法医的) analysis)

Privacy 
Protection of data related to a person
Measures: Rules of data avoidance and data minimization 
Specification of the data recording purpose 
Data aggregation: k-anonymity procedure 
Pseudonym: Identity is known to a trusted third party (“notary”) 
Non-traceability: Change of pseudonyms



3)	Differentiate between the terms vulnerability, threat, and risk. 
Vulnerability  A vulnerability in code or protocols enables that security measures in a system are circumvented, changed or manipulated.
Threat Threats result from potential attacks which can be carried out by using one or more vulnerabilities to endanger the IT security aims.
Risk 
Risk of a threat is the likelihood of the event and the potential impact. This can be expressed as: risk = likelihood * impact

Chapter 2: Attacks on Networks 
1)	Provide examples of attacks on different OSI layers. 
OSI 1 physical layer(physical damage) infrastructure damage 
OSI 2 data link layer(local communication) ARP spoofing, ARP Flooding, WLAN sniffing 
OSI 3 network layer IP spoofing, Indirect scanning
OSI 4 transport layer SYN flooding, illegal combination of TCP flags
OSI 5 application layer Buffer overflows, Viruses, worms, Trojan horses, ransomware 

2)	Differentiate between ARP spoofing, IP spoofing, and Caller ID spoofing.  
ARP spoofing Manipulation of MAC addresses,  man in the middle attack, attacker receives data from sender and forwards them to real destination.
IP spoofing use of wrong IP address 
Caller ID spoofing  use of wrong ID 

3)	How does ARP spoofing in a switched Ethernet network work? 
Attacker spreads wrong ARP replies in the network 
ARP replies contain MAC address of attacker 
IP address of router or user 
Systems put wrong information from ARP reply into their ARP tables (Packets towards router or user IP address are forwarded to MAC address of attacker)
Attacker reads data and forwards them 
ARP spoofing procedure 
1. Attacker sends ARP reply frame (intended for user)(contains the wrong source IP address the wrong one is router's ip address)  (which means attacker know the mac address in advance?)
2. Attacker sends ARP reply frame (intended for router) (contains the wrong source IP address the wrong one is target's ip address)
3. User sends IP packets to router in frame with attacker's MAC address 
4. Router sends Ip packets to user in frame with attacker's MAC address 

4)	How can DHCP be abused? 
DHCP is used for automated provisioning of IP address, subnet mask, default gateway and DNS server 
DHCP starvation 
Attackers send many IP address requests to local
DHCP server
Use many different spoofed MAC addresses
DHCP pool is limited, no addresses for real users left
Rogue DHCP server 
Attacker's computer behaves like DHCP server 
Provides wrong configuration dta , in particular DNS server 

5)	What is the meaning of a port scan? Is a port scan the real attack?
port scan is to check ports one by one. 
Port scan is used for attacker to make preparation for DOS 
Directly connect to target server
Check ports one by one for service
Scanning is obvious
no, it is not a real attack 
It can prepare for the DOS attack. the attacker can know which port is open, so attacker can attack. 
 
6)	How can a port scan be carried out without making the victim aware of the attacker’s IP address? Explain the steps. 
1.	Attacker sends SYN segment to an unused port on proxy 
2.	Proxy replies with RST-ACK segment, attacker gets IP-ID 
3.	Attacker sends TCP segment containing proxy IP address to target server 
4.	Target server replies with RST-ACK segment to proxy 
5.	No reaction of proxy, IP-ID is not increased 
6.	Attacker sends again a SYN segment to an used port on proxy
7.	Proxy replies with RST-ACK segment, IP-ID is increased by 1. 
 
  
7)	How are DDoS attacks typically carried out? 
By using bot network to consume all resources  
carried out by many sources at the same time 

smurf attack 
ICMP echo request with wrong source Ip address ( spoofed by target server IP ) then broadcast the ICMP request. All server get the ICMP request  reply to target server 

SYN flooding attack 
attacker tries to establish TCP connection with wrong source IP address, so that the third step for ACK can not get reply because the Ip address does not 
exist, which is a serious problem.  

E-Mail storms to user 
flooding of  inbox 
Registration to many mailing lists 

Buffer Overflow (example ping of death)
IP packet bigger than allowed 2^16 bytes 
send in a set of fragments 
Reassembly consumes many resources on receiver (IP stack buffer)
May lead to OS crash(affected former OSs WinNT, Linux)
	
Programming attack 
Land attack 
 	set source address = destination address and source port = destination port 
	system send packets to it self and CPU load =100% 
Teardrop attack 
       send fragments with wrong fragment offsets (overlapping fragments)
       lead to system crash in some OS (WinNT , Linux 2.0)

the previous attack can be used for each bot to attack a target server 
attacker can control huge number of hosts used to attack a target server

8)	Explain what bot nets are and how they are organized. For which purposes can bot nets be used? 
Bot net is a number of internet-connected devices, each of which is running one or more bots. A tree structure can be used to organize the bot nets but now bot nets work as 
peer-to-peer networks. Botnets can be used to perform distributed denial of-service attack, steal data, send spam and allows the attacker to access the device and its connection. 

9)	How can the TCP handshake procedure be abused for a DoS attack? Which countermeasures can be taken? 
If the target server gets no replay , it will retransmit the SYN-ACK segments. This may consume all resources on a system. 
Protection against SYN floods 
Resource reservation on server after first SYN 
Resource reservation holds for 60s 
Five retries lead to connection reestablishment. 
limit the request for the TCP handshake acknowledgement 
push server ISN number into the ring buffer 
reserve the resource for only after three-way handshake connection  
Typically clients can initiate several 1000 connections. 
Check for address spoofing 

the possible steps for attacker to operate the bot nets 
1.assumption that hosts have already been infected so that a bot net is active 
2.attacker gives command to "command&control" server 
3.Command&control server gives commands to all bots 
4.Finally, bots carry out the attack

10)	Explain how a DNS amplification attack works. 
Public DNS servers answer DNS requests for anybody in recursive manner 
Attacker searches for or prepares DNS Server A with long entries about server Y.
Request to DNS Server Xn about information on server Y which has been put on DNS Server A 
Request leads to transfer of large entries to DNS servers Xn 
These requests use target IP address as source
Many large answers are sent to target server 
Conclusion : Attacker sends small requests to DNS which leads to relatively large answer

11)	What is the potential impact if an attacker can place wrong DNS entries on DNS servers? Give an example scenario. 
Attacker put wrong DNS entries on DNS servers
DNS servers reply with answer of wrong information to the target server 
target server may redirect to the wrong address the attacker can manipulate 
further manipulation can be done like fake website or response with large data traffic may happen. 


12)	What is the difference between viruses, worms and Trojan horses? 
Viruses 
Sequence of commands, requires host program 
Cannot run on its own 
Self-replication (can spread itself to other host programs)

Worms 
Program that can run on its own 
Does not require a host program 
Replicates itself (via network or USB-sticks (with autorun))

Trojan horse 
Program with unexpected, malicious behavior 
Has beneficial usage functionality 
Hidden malicious code (e.g. logs keyboard use, sends screenshot, communicates with command&control center) 
No self-replication 
Infection 
Download of useful program with this side effect 
Drive-by-download

13)	What is ransomware? 
Ransomware is a type of malicious software from cryptovirology that threatens to publish the victim’s data or perpetually block access to it unless a ransom is paid. 
More advanced malware used a technique to encrypt the victim’s files, making them inaccessible, and demands a ransom payment to decrypt them. 

14)	Provide a sequence of steps that leads to a Persistent Cross-Site Scripting attack.  
Persistent attack 
there is a threat that users can leave comments and the comments can be seen by all users. 
attacker does not only enter plain text, but also javascript code 
the javascript code is stored on the server side in DB if it is not prevented 
one user open the website and the script is delivered to the user on web page access. 

reflected attack 
user is an administrator of a company network and has several cookies stored in his browser 
He receives e-mail from attacker 
the e-mail claims that something is wrong with company webpage 
e-mail contains a link to the webpage including some javascript code  like http://www.example.com/?search = <script type="text/javascript"> XSS problem </script>
the consequence is that attacker can take over the session. 

15)	How does SQL injection work?  

there is input field on the website 
attacker inputs normal information followed by the character ; plus meaning in SQL(another command) 
i.e. Lubeck; select * from users ; 
the command is execuated on the server side and result is sent back to the client side. 

16)	Which measures should be taken to protect oneself against XSS or injection?
Server protection measures 
check user input for script code 
Client protection measures 
deactivate javascript(hardly possible stupid solution tor browser)
use add-ons like NoScript


17)	Which methods are possible to detect Spam e-mails? 


Method to prevent 
1.  Ensure you know and trust the sender before opening an email. 
2.  Check the subject line for common spam topics 
3.  avoid opening untrusted link 

methods 
Content-based message encoding 
keyword filtering rules
email authentication rules 
mail server IP blacklists 
domain blacklists for sending domain and email content

18)	Explain how a buffer overflow can happen and the potential consequences. 
Too long input which is over the predefined length overwrite internal program buffer.
Attacker can use this to manipulate the return address and then execute code from attacker. 
For example, attacker can code to start a shell. 


19)	How can a user become affected by a drive-by-exploit? 
User just open a web page and is affected. 
Advertisement on web page can be rented. Attacker use advertisement to put malicious javascript code on it. JavaScript or other malware code is delivered together with advertisements. 
Attacker collects knowledge which web sites are often used by victims.
Attacker searches for vulnerabilities on these web sites.
A found vulnerable web site is used to redirect the victim to a special site containing exploit code. 

20)	Cars are often connected to the Internet nowadays. Discuss potential security threats. 
Remote unlocking of doors 
Takeover of control 
 
21)	What is the difference between online analysis and post mortem analysis in IT forensics? Discuss advantages and disadvantages. 
Online analysis
Advantages 
work on the running system 
Many temporary data are available 
Disadvantages Further damage may happen 
Active malware can occur. 
Post mortem analysis 
Advantages it is possible to work only with copies of data and leave originals undestroyed. 
			  It allows to repeatedly process the data in different way 
Disadvantages it needs many steps to finish the whole work. 

Chapter 3: Network Protection 
1)	What are the reasons why many organizations structure their local area networks by using VLANs? 
the problem LAN topology follows physical configuration and is broadcast domain
data traffic is (at least partially) visible for all end systems
logical separations in a LAN can be used for user group isolation 
Separation of broadcast domains to reduce the traffic load 
Security(in particular confidentiality) require so far mechanisms on Network Layer(in particular firewall) to prevent attacker from eavesdropping

2)	Explain the difference between port-based VLANs, MAC-based VLANs, and IP-based VLANs. 
Port-based VLANs    all end systems behind a port belonging to the VLAN
MAC-based VLANs map MAC address with VLANs 
	      connection of end system ot VLAN independent form switch port 
	      needs more effort because of high configuration 
IP-based VLANs violation of layering concept 
	                 map IP address to the VLANs

3)	Explain how the rules on a packet filter firewall look like.  
Firstly we have key selection criteria to determine “true” and “false”.
Selection criteria includes IP address , port number , protocol ID , SYN/ACK flags, etc. 
When we meet with the first true, action determines general behavior after matching.
We can make decision whether packet is forwarded 
Allow Rule : forward packet 
Deny Rule: drop packet 
Reject Rule: drop packet + send ICMP notification back to source. 
Packet filtering firewall is the process of passing or blocking packets at a network interface based on source and destination addresses , ports or protocols The process is used in conjunction with packet mangling and Network Address Translation(NAT). Packet filtering is often part of a firewall program for protecting a local network from unwanted intrusion. 
Packet filtering is done by a program called a packet filter. The packet filter examines the header of each packet based on a specific set of rules, and on that basis, decides to prevent it from passing or allow it to pass. 

4)   It should be possible to reach any web server (TCP port 80) in the Internet from an internal network (10.0.1.0/24). To allow for reasonable communication the web servers should be allowed to answer. Provide firewall rules including a default rule for specifying this in a suitable manner. 
Packet from internal network(10.0.1.0/24) which is the source address and port number is 80 should be allowed. And packet whose destination address is (10.0.1.0/24) and port number is 80 and source address is arbitrary should also be allowed. Otherwise , other packets should be rejected.  

5)	Which impact does the order of firewall rules have for the check of packets? How should the rules be ordered?  

Firewall rules have a priority order that determines the order in which the rules are applied to network traffic. 

Firewall rules are shown as a list on the Rules tab. The rules are applied from top to bottom, and the first rule that matches the traffic overrides all the other rules below. The main principle is to allow only the needed traffic and block the rest. Therefore, the last rule of a firewall profile is the Deny rest rule. It blocks all the traffic that the rules above it do not specifically allow. 

Dynamic firewall rules are shown separately as a list on the Activity tab. The priority of the dynamic rules is lower than the priority of normal firewall rules. This means that if a firewall rule denies some traffic, the dynamic rule cannot allow it. However, the priority of the dynamic rules is higher than the priority of the predefined Deny rest rule. 

6)	A company provides services intended for the public Internet on a few servers. In addition, it operates a set of other computers that do not provide publicly available services. Make a drawing that shows a typical DMZ configuration in this scenario. 
Access from outside to DMZ is only allowed for selected services and hosts 
Access from outside to inside is in general not allowed 
Access from DMZ to inside is in general not allowed
Access from DMZ to outside is  in general not allowed 
Access from inside to DMZ is allowed in most cases. 
Access from inside to outside is allowed 

7)	Assume that there is a separation between internal network, DMZ and the Internet. Which kinds of connections (initiated from where?) should in general be possible and which ones should be blocked by packet filters? 
Access from outside to inside is in general not allowed 
Access from outside to DMZ is only allowed for selected services and hosts 
Access from DMZ to inside is in general not allowed 
Access from DMZ to outside is in general not allowed 
Access from inside to DMZ is only allowed for selected services and hosts 
Access from inner network to outside is in general allowed 
Useful functionality replies are allowed 

8)	Should servers in a company network be configured to reply to ICMP echo requests? Discuss advantages and disadvantages. 
Servers should be configured to reply to ICMP echo requests 
Advantages improve the availability of the server It is useful for diagnostic. 
Disadvantage remote control your server through ICMP echo requests    

9)	In which respect is there a relationship between a firewall and ARP spoofing? 
reference to the teacher's answer 



10)	How should a firewall and a bastion host be configured? 
A bastion host is a special purpose computer on a network specifically designed and configured to withstand attack. The computer generally hosts a single application, for example a proxy server, and all other services are removed or limited to reduce the threat to the computer. 
It is hardened in this manner primarily due to its location and purpose, which is either on the outside of a firewall or in a demilitarized zone and usually involves access from untrusted networks or computers. 

11)	What is the difference between network-based sensors (NIDS) and host-based sensors (HIDS)? 
Network-based sensors NIDS
Monitors all network traffic at central network locations 
Advantages 
It can detect attacks on different hosts in the network 
It does not require resources on host 
It can be configured as invisible for attackers 
Disadvantages 
Throughput may be too high to observe all traffic 
It can not observe situation on hosts 
It can not inspect encrypted communication 
Limited knowledge leads to false positives
Host-based sensors HIDS 
It runs on a specific host to protect it on application and OS level, sometimes network level 
Advantages 
It can observe actual influence on system (contrast to NIDS)
Network traffic can possibly be monitored on all layers. 
Disadvantages 
It has to be installed on every host 
Application and OS specific, requires more adaption effort for heterogeneous hosts 
It cannot be configured as invisible 
It consumes resources on host 
There is no information available on parallel attacks on other systems 
		
12)	Why is it necessary to run (several) IDS in addition to firewalls? 
There are different ways of attack detection by IDS
Some are available in commercial or open source IDS 
Others are under test in academia 

13)	Provide a drawing of a network with a DMZ and show useful locations of HIDS and NIDS. 

HIDS host-based IDS 


NIDS Network-based IDS 


14)	What is the meaning of “honeypot” for computer networks? How are honeypots used today? 
Traffic from the honeypot is not used for real service use 
It is possible to learn how attackers are performing attacks . 


15)	Which security models do you know? Explain the purpose of the Bell-LaPadula and the Biba model and their rules. 
Bell-Lapadula Model aim : ensure data confidentiality 
No-read-up 			No subject S1 from a lower confidentiality class is allowed to read data of a subject S2 belonging to a higher confidentiality class 
No-read-down 		
Biba Model
Chinese Walls Model (Hybrid Model)

16)	Distinguish between the terms “verification” and “identification”. 
Two authentication methods can be distinguished 
Verification  user claims to be a certain person 
Comparison with reference data used to check it
Identification data from an unknown person is compared with reference data from all persons

17)	What is the purpose of MPLS and how is it related to circuit switching and packet switching? How does MPLS impact IP routing? 
MPLS is a protocol-agnostic routing technique designed to speed up and shape traffic flows across enterprise wide area and service provider networks. 
MPLS tries to combine the benefit of both the above switching technologies. It uses circuit switching within an ISP while packet switching is used within ISP’s. 
MPLS requires each router to independently determine a packet’s next hop by inspecting the packet’s destination IP address before consulting its own routing table. This process consumes time and hardware resources, potentially resulting in degraded performance for real-time application such as voice and video.


18)	Explain the terms “label edge router”, “label switch router”, “label switched path” and “forwarding equivalence class”. 
LER: Label edge router 		adds and removes labels 
LSR: label switch router  		change labels, work as a switch rather than a router
LSP: label switched path 		path between LER and LSR or path between LSR and LSR
FEC: Forwarding Equivalence Class It can determine group of IP packets which are forwarded in the same way. It may have a table entry 
It is easy to introduce priority. 
		
		
19)	How are the contents of Management Information Bases arranged? Are these objects in the sense of a programming language like Java? 
Management Information Base(MIB)
Variable definitions are registered in the ISO registration tree 
Nodes are identified by names and IDs 
Leaves of the tree represent values in the managed objects
these objects are not like java because it is simple. 


20)	What is specific about an SNMP trap message in comparison to the other SNMP messages? 
SNMP trap message 
SNMP traps enable an agent to notify the management station of significant events by way of an unsolicited SNMP message. 
The setup on the left shows a network management system that polls information and gets a response. The setup on the right slows an agent that sends an unsolicited or asynchronous trap to the network management system. 


21)	Which transport protocol is the basis of SNMP? Explain this choice. Are there also disadvantages of this choice? 
UDP  avoid the overhead of the TCP 
one request and one response. too much effort to use TCP 
Messages can get lost. 


22)	What is the purpose of the “community string” in SNMP? Discuss it under security aspects. 
The “SNMP Community string” is like a user id or password that allows access to a router’s or other device’s statistics.
IP Check Server Monitor sends the community string along with all SNMP requests. 
If the community string is correct, the device responds with the requested information 
If the community string is incorrect, the device simply discards the request and do not respond. 
SNMP community strings are used only by devices which support SNMPv1 and SNMPv2 protocol. SNMPv3 uses username/password and authentication, along with an encryption key. 


23)	Which are the major differences between the SNMP versions 1, 2 and 3? 
SNMP v1 and SNMPv2 contain only limited security mechanisms 
There is no encrypted message and no participant authentication
SNMPv1 and SNMPv2 are used for monitoring, but not for administration of managed devices 
In SNMPv3 a completely different new architecture is specified 
Security in SNMPv3 
Authentication via username/password or key 
Encryption of Messages using DES (Data Encryption Standard)
Specification of user-based privileges 

24)	A company network is strongly protected from the outside world. Its internal network should be managed via SNMP. Which version would you recommend? 
Use SNMPv1 v2 
Only user id and password is required to get information from managed devices. 
The traffic in the network for SNMP is smaller than version3.
effort for SNMP version3 is more. 

25)	Explain the difference between active and passive network monitoring. 
Active network monitoring 
Measures the flow of data on your network by ‘injecting’ test traffic into the environment. Active monitoring adds overhead to your networking hardware, and could result in poor performance if used in excess.
Passive network monitoring 
Passive network monitoring techniques constantly collect data from the network environment over a period of time, and base their results on historic data. Because it doesn’t pull real-time information from your network hardware, passive monitoring is typically far less resource-intensive than active monitoring. However, passive monitoring is better suited to general measurements over time , and as data. 

Conclusion 
Active network monitoring injects extra traffic into the network, which may influence the performance of the network. 
Passive network monitoring is far less resource-intensive but does not pull real-time information from your network hardware. 
Passive monitoring techniques typically require specialized devices in order to measure traffic, so the economy commitment could be higher than that of active monitoring. 

Chapter 4: Security Protocols and VPNs 
1)	Which different kinds of VPNs do you know? 
Intranet VPN Site-To-Site VPN 
Internal network of company/organization 
Central configuration on transition points towards Internet, not on each end system. 
Remote Access VPN (End-to-Site) VPN
A Tunnel is configured to link between company domain and mobile employee notebook or home office. Site means company domain.  End means devices that is used by individuals.
Extranet VPN 
Linking of organizations link between location of other company and company headquarters 
Implementation dependent on way of collaboration 
Realization using IPsec or SSL/TLS possible
End-To-End VPN 
Tunnel is configured between two end points
Configuration on both devices necessary 
Highest security level possible due to end-to-end encryption 
Realization often using SSL/TLS or SSH 

2)	What is the difference between symmetric and asymmetric ciphers? 
Symmetric ciphers encrypt message with a single key 
Asymmetric ciphers encrypt message with different key 

3)	In which way has the AES algorithm been standardized? Do you regard this as a reasonable way of standardization in case of a security-related algorithm? 
Competition was regraded as very good method for algorithm selection afterwards. 
Algorithm to be published with details 
Worldwide use without license fees 
Useful for next 30 years 

4)	Explain the difference between block ciphers and stream ciphers. 
Block ciphers  
expects input in specified block length n 
message m of length |m| is divided into r blocks of length n
Necessary to fill up last block with additional (random) bits
Stream ciphers encryption of small plain text units 

5)	What is the difference between electronic code book mode and cipher block chaining? 
Electronic code book mode each plain text block is encrypted by the same key on its own
Cipher block chaining each plain text block is XORed with previous cipher text block 

6)	How can steganography be applied related to images with RGB encoding? 
Steganography in pictures
Change least significant bit in RGB color values 

7)	Explain how a message authentication code is calculated (in general). Which security aims are targeted by using such a code? 
To ensure the authenticity of sender 
Prerequisite: Alice and Bob have exchanged a secret key beforehand
1.	Alice wants to communicate with Bob, Bob wants to be sure that this is really Alice.
2.	Bob sends randomly generated bit sequence (challenge) to Alice.
3.	Alice uses an algorithm (input: secret key, random sequence received from Bob) and sends result back to Bob(response) 
4.	Bob compares Alice’s calculation result with his own calculation result (done in parallel)
5.	If both are equal, Alice authenticity is verified (she knows the secret key)
   
8)	Which features are important for cryptographic hash functions? 
Hash function has the features of a one-way function 
It is practically impossible to find any collision. i.e. an arbitrary pair m, m’ where m is not equal to m’ and H(m) = H(m’) 

9)	Explain the main tasks of a certification authority. 
Certificate issuance  Generation of data structures and signature
Certification repository Commonly accessible data base of certificates 
Certificate revocation Necessary if private key has been stolen 
Certificate update Renewal of certificates after expiry 
Key generation 
Certification history Data base of no longer valid certificates(for investigations)
   Notarization   CA signs agreements between users
   Time stamping  CA ties information to dates 
Cross certification CA issues certificates about foreign CAs
Attribute certificates Link attributes to an identity(e.g. rights, mandates)

10)	Why is it necessary to check for certificate revocation? 
Certificate revocation is needed if key is compromised 
Certificate revocation lists : List of certificate IDs with dates of invalidity, digitally signed by CA
Requirements on information dissemination 
Up-to-date 
Complete 
Efficient 

11)	Map the protocols IPsec, SSL/TLS and SSH to the OSI model. 
IPsec OSI layer 3  network layer 
SSL secure sockets layer version 1,2,3 OSI layer 4.5 between transport layer and application layer
TLS Transport Layer Security OSI layer 4 
	    SSH secure shell application layer OSI layer 5 


12)	Explain the features of AH and ESP in IPsec as well as the difference between the tunnel mode and the transport mode. What does it mean to “tunnel IP packets” in this context? 
Authentication Header  Protocol to ensure integrity and authenticity, not confidentiality 
Cryptographic checksum (hash) calculated for IP packet (options: MD5 ,SHA -1 , SHA-* , none , …)
Encapsulating Security Payload(ESP) Protocol to ensure confidentiality , integrity and authenticity 
Cryptographic checksum like in AH 
Symmetric encryption of IP packet or payload 
Tunnel mode AH authenticate whole IP packet 
ESP encrypts IP header, payload and ESP trailer and authenticate ESP header, IP header ,  payload and ESP trailer
Transport mode has less IP header    
tunneling means you have the IP header and then there is another IP header put in front of it by the gateway router.
new ip header contains the address of the gateway 
tunnel IP packets is composed of two part one part is IP header used for tunnel between two gateway router to forwad packets. 


13)	What is a replay attack and how is it prevented by IPsec? 
A reply attack is a form of network attack in which a valid data transmission is maliciously or fraudulently repeated or delayed. This is carried out either by the originator or by an adversary who intercepts the data and re-transmits it , possibly as part of a masquerade attack by IP packet substitution. This is one of the lower tier versions of a “Man-in-the-middle attack”
AH and ESP are used to prevent reply attack 
sequence number can be used to prevent 


14)	A company has two locations which are connected over the Internet. The company would like to make sure that there are no successful eavesdrops. Provide a useful configuration for this scenario based on IPsec. 
use tunnel mode because the payload is encrypted and use ESP. 

15)	What is the difference if there is https instead of http in the browser input line? 
https means that the data from the input line is encrypted during the process of transmission. 
		http does not encrypt data during the transmission 

16)	How are symmetric and asymmetric ciphers combined in the TLS implementation? 
SSL and TLS use a combination of symmetric and asymmetric encryption to ensure message privacy. During the SSL or TLS handshake, the SSL or TLS client and server agree an encryption algorithm and a shared key to be used for one session only. 
asymmetric ciphers are used to change the key 
during the session, we use the symmetric encryption. 

17)	Compare IPsec and SSL/TLS by showing commonalities and differences. Discuss also advantages and disadvantages. 
Commonalities Client and server authentication 
Securing of confidentiality, integrity and authenticity (but on different layers)
Differences 
SSL/TLS does not protect IP header (attacks possible)
    SSL/TLS can not protect UDP-based traffic (possible with Datagram TLS)
		SSL/TLS requires modification of applications 
		Administrative effort for per user is typically lower for SSL/TLS 
	    Detailed rights management is easier to be realized for SSL/TLS 
    Conclusions 
For single application and frequently changing user population we can use SSL/TLS (e.g. home banking, mobile user)
For multiple application and static user communication we can use user IPsec rather than SSL/TLS
Assessment of IPsec 
Advantages 
		Limitation to IP not an issue due to IP’s dominance, works for all applications 
		Assurance of confidentiality, integrity and authentication 
Disadvantages 
		Complex IPsec standards and implementations 
		Effort is needed for tunnel configuration and certification infrastructure 
		Effort is needed for VPN clients on end systems 
Assessment of SSL/TLS
Advantages 
In many cases no additional software is required for end users 
We have assurance of confidentiality, integrity and authentication from SSL/TLS 
Disadvantages 
There is no IP header protection 
SSL/TLS works only for TCP-based applications 
Configuration is needed for each application required 
End system protection is needed  
certificate trustworthiness is concerned difficult  

18)	A company has sales people who are often negotiating contracts with the customers during visits at the customer sites. During these negotiations they need to get access to servers within the company. Discuss whether a realization via IPsec or SSL/TLS is preferable. 
IPsec and SSL/TLS both have Client and server authentication
Securing of confidentiality, integrity and authenticity( but on different layers)
Strong cryptographic algorithms selectable 
if you use browser to change contract, you can use SSL/TLS 
if you have other application requring other lower layer techonology, you will have more effort to configure the simple application. 


19)	What is the purpose of the SSH protocol? 
The secure Shell protocol is a protocol for secure remote login and other sercure network sevices over an insecure network. 
Original purpose  replace insecure “remote-tools” to execute commands on remote computer 
It also can be used for tunneling of applications (port forwarding) 
It is useful for small VPNs 
Application is enhanced like SFTP, SCP 



20)	Why is it not sufficient to enable SSL/TLS in an e-mail client to ensure end-to-end confidentiality? What needs to be used instead? 
 SSL/TLS only has encryption to mail server and from mail server, but not end -to- end, which means that Plain text is on the mail servers and there is no encryption between mail servers  (pretty good privacy).
We need PGP on combination with SSL/TLS so that user can communicate only with encryption up to mail server. 
